+++
title = "Unit 8"
date = 2021-12-13T15:39:36-05:00
draft = false
+++

## Lesson 1: Relations and Functions

Let `$x$`, `$y$` represent an independent, and dependent variable, respectively.

A **relation** defines relations between two sets.

It can also be represented as a set of ordered pairs with two values, `$x$` and `$y$`.

It can also be defined as a referentially transparent and side-effect-free procedure (in computer science).

`Relation = List[Tuple[complex, complex]]`

A **function** is a relation where each value of `$x$` corresponds with only one value of `$y$`.

The **domain** of a relation is the set of all values of `$x$`.

```python3
def domain(relation):
    return [s[0] for s in relation]
```

The **range** of a relation is the set of all values of `$y$`.

```python3
def range(relation):
    return [s[1] for s in relation]
```

### Set Notation

- `$\{…\}$` defines a set.
- `$(…)$` defines a tuple.
- `$D\{…\}$` defines the domain of a set.
- `$R\{…\}$` defines the range of a set.

#### Example

1. For a relation `$S\{(0, 1), (2, 3), (4, 5)\}$`,
   `$D_S\{0, 2, 4\}$`, and `$R_S\{1, 3, 5\}$`.
   This relation is a function.
2. For a relation `$S\{(0, 1), (2, 1), (4, 5)\}$`,
   `$D_S\{0, 2, 4\}$`, and `$R_S\{1, 1, 5\}$`.
   This relation is *not* a function (`$S(0) = S(2)$`).

### Vertical Line Test

The **vertical line test** can be used to determine whether a relation is a function.
If for every vertical line on the appropriate plane, there exists only one point where the vertical line intersects the relation, the relation is a function.

An example of a relation:

{{% svg id="circ" title="circle" desc="a circle centred at the origin, which fails the vertical line test because a vertical line at x=0 goes through two points" style="width: 24%;" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<circle cx="50" cy="50" r="25" stroke="#000" fill="none"/>
<path d="M30,0 l0 100" stroke="var(--fail)" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

An example of a function:

{{% svg id="lin" title="linear" desc="a linear equation, which fails the vertical line test because a vertical line at x=0 goes through two points" style="width: 24%;" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M0,0 l100 100" stroke="#000" />
<path d="M30,0 l0 100" stroke="var(--pass)" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

An example of a function:

{{% svg id="quad" title="quadratic" desc="an quadratic equation, which fails the vertical line test because a vertical line at x=0 goes through two points" style="width: 24%;" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M0,0 Q50,100 100,0" stroke="#000" fill="none" />
<path d="M30,0 l0 100" stroke="var(--pass)" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

An example of a relation:

{{% svg id="inv-quad" title="inverse quadratic" desc="an inverse quadratic equation, which fails the vertical line test because a vertical line at x=0 goes through two points" style="width: 24%;" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M0,0 Q100,50 0,100" stroke="#000" fill="none" />
<path d="M30,0 l0 100" stroke="var(--fail)" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

## Lesson 2: Function Notation

`$f(x)$` is pronounced as "f of x", "f at x", among many others. It means to replace `$f(x)$` with the definition of `$f(x)$`.

For example, if `$f(x)=x+1$`, `$f(1) = 1+1 = 2$` and `$f(y) = x+y$`.

{{% svg id="func" title="a function" desc="a function for use in the example below" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M0,0 Q50,100 100,0" stroke="#000" fill="none" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

`$f(0) = 0$`

## Composition of Functions

**Function composition** is a useful way to make new functions. It is done using the `$\circ$` operator.

`$(f\circ g)(x) = f(g(x))$`

This is pronounced as "f composed with g of x" (`$g\circ f$` is pronounced "g composed with f").

 Note that this is similar to the funtion composition operator (`.`) in Haskell: `(f . g)(x) = f(g(x))`

For example,
if `$g(x)=5x^2+1$`,
and `$f(x)=x+1$`,
then `$g(f(x)) = (g\circ f)(x) = g(x+1) = 5(x+1)^2+1$`

## Properties of Parent Functions

**Even functions (遇関数)** satisfy `$f(x) = f(-x)$`.
(notice how even functions have even exponents (i.e. `$\frac{n}{2} \in \mathbb{Z}$` in `$y=x^n+c$`))
For example, `$y = |x|$` is even, and therefore it is symmetric on the y axis:
{{% svg id="even-func" title="an even function" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M50,50 l0,-50" stroke="var(--ok)" stroke-dasharray="4,4" fill="none" />
<path d="M50,50 l50,-50" stroke="#000" fill="none" />
<path d="M50,50 l-50,-50" stroke="#000" fill="none" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

**Odd functions (奇関数)** satisfy `$f(x) = -f(-x)$`.
For example, `$y = x$` is odd, and therefore it is mirrored on both the `$x$` and `$y$` axes.
{{% svg id="even-func" title="an even function" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M0,0 l100,100" stroke="var(--ok)" stroke-dasharray="4,4" fill="none" />
<path d="M0,100 l100,-100" stroke="#000" fill="none" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

An **asymptote** is a line that the graph of a relation gets closer to, but never meets

## Increasing and Decreasing Functions (possibly non-standard)

**Increasing functions (増加関数)** are functions where `$y$` always increases when `$x$` increases.
In other words, the slope is always `$\ge 0$`.
Another way to put it is that the derivative of the function never goes below 0.

{{% svg id="even-func" title="an even function" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M0,100 l100,-100" stroke="#000" fill="none" />
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

**Decreasing functions (減少関数)** are the oppoosite of increasing functions: <br />
They are functions where `$y$` always decreases when `$x$` increases.
In other words, the slope is always `$\le 0$`.
Another way to put it is that the derivative of the function never goes above 0.

{{% svg id="even-func" title="an even function" %}}
{{< svg/grid >}}
{{< svg/origin >}}
{{< unsafe >}}
<path d="M0,0 l100,100" stroke="#000" fill="none">
	<animate attributeName="rx" values="0;5;0" dur="10s" repeatCount="indefinite" />
</path>
{{< /unsafe >}}
{{% /svg %}}

**WIP**

